MSC4492: Clarify that pagination tokens are directionless (#4492)
matrix-org/matrix-doc: proposals/4492-directionless-pagination-tokens.md

Reviewer: Implementation not required: the MSC is effectively already implemented.

vague around which tokens can be used with which endpoints.

There is a [spec PR](spec2357) which attempts to fix an inconsistency in the `/relations`
endpoint: the `from` parameter currently lists `next_batch` from `/sync` as an acceptable
value, but this was likely meant to be `prev_batch`. This has raised a broader question:
are pagination tokens directional, or do they represent an opaque position in the event
stream without inherent direction?

Synapse has always treated tokens as opaque positions — a [`StreamToken`][synapse-streamtoken]
can be used for both forward and backward pagination depending on the `dir` parameter.
(Internally it embeds a [`RoomStreamToken`][synapse-roomstreamtoken] with stream (`s`)
and topological (`t`) variants, but this is an implementation detail — the API-visible
type is the same everywhere.)

This MSC aims to codify that understanding: pagination tokens do not have an
inherent direction, even if they happen to be labelled `next_batch` or
`prev_batch`. The direction is always determined by the `dir` parameter.

## Proposal

Pagination tokens produced by `/messages`, `/relations`, `/context`, and `/search`'s

> `context` field represent a position in the event stream and MUST be indistinguishable.

Reviewer 2: Is the omission of `/sync` deliberate here? Are you trying to draw a distinction between the room-scoped tokens and the globally-scoped `next_batch` from `/sync`? It could maybe do with a little clarification.

Author: `next_batch` isn't room scoped, right? So it isn't indistinguishable. Although it should include: "`prev_batch` response field of `/sync`", I think.

Author: I ended up combining this paragraph and the one after it since they seem repetitive. Hopefully that's clear.

See [`5979ee8` (this PR)](https://github.com/matrix-org/matrix-spec-proposals/pull/4492/changes/5979ee84d1cf1dd155e390296c2eef1439b23fc0)

Tokens SHOULD
only be used within the context of a single room. (E.g. a request for `/messages` in
room #test:matrix.org does not make sense to re-use for #foo:matrix.org.)

> A token produced by `/messages`, `/relations`, or `/context` is tied to the room it

Reviewer 2: `/search`'s tokens are also room-scoped, as is `prev_batch` in `/sync`.

```suggestion
A token produced by `/messages`, `/relations`, `/context`, the `context` response field of `/search`, or the `prev_batch` response field of `/sync`, is tied to the room it
```

> was produced and clients MUST NOT be used for another room. There are no guarantees

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
was produced for and clients MUST NOT use them for another room. There are no guarantees
```

> using one in a different room will produce the correct results, servers MAY throw

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
using one in a different room will produce the correct results; servers MAY throw
```

an error in this case.

> Tokens produced by [`/sync` `since` parameter][sync] resolve against the server's

Reviewer 2: `since` is an input, so it can't produce tokens. Do you mean  `next_batch`?

Author: Yes, I think that's what I meant. Does this make sense?

```suggestion
`next_batch` tokens produced by [`/sync`][sync] resolve against the server's
```

Reviewer 2: yup

| Endpoint | Input | Currently accepts | Output | Change |
|---|---|---|---|---|
| `/sync` | `since` | Its own `next_batch` | `next_batch`, `prev_batch` | None |
| `/messages` | `from` | `/sync` (`prev_batch`/`next_batch`), itself (`end`), optionally itself (`start`) | `start`, `end` | `/sync`, `/messages`, `/relations`, `/context`, and `/search`'s `context` |
| `/messages` | `to` | `/sync` (`prev_batch`/`next_batch`), itself (`end`) | — | `/sync`, `/messages`, `/relations`, `/context`, and `/search`'s `context` |
| `/relations` | `from` | Itself, `/messages` (`start`), `/sync` (`next_batch`) | `next_batch`, `prev_batch` | `/sync`, `/messages`, `/relations`, `/context`, and `/search`'s `context` |
| `/relations` | `to` | Itself, `/messages`, `/sync` (vague) | — | `/sync`, `/messages`, `/relations`, `/context`, and `/search`'s `context` |
| `/context` | (none) | Output only | `start` ("backwards"), `end` ("forwards") | Remove directional language |
| `/search` result | (none) | Output only | `start`, `end` (no directional language) | None |

Note that this does not modify the pagination of `/search` results itself, which are
only usable within `/search`.

> Open question: should `/threads` also be part of this list?

Reviewer 2: No, I don't think so. I think `/threads`'s pagination params live in their own namespace.

There is a [spec PR](spec2357) which attempts to fix an inconsistency in the `/relations`
endpoint: the `from` parameter currently lists `next_batch` from `/sync` as an acceptable
value, but this was likely meant to be `prev_batch`. This has raised a broader question:
are pagination tokens directional, or do they represent an opaque position in the event
stream without inherent direction?

Synapse has always treated tokens as opaque positions — a [`StreamToken`][synapse-streamtoken]
can be used for both forward and backward pagination depending on the `dir` parameter.
(Internally it embeds a [`RoomStreamToken`][synapse-roomstreamtoken] with stream (`s`)
and topological (`t`) variants, but this is an implementation detail — the API-visible
type is the same everywhere.)

This MSC aims to codify that understanding: pagination tokens do not have an
inherent direction, even if they happen to be labelled `next_batch` or
`prev_batch`. The direction is always determined by the `dir` parameter.

## Proposal

Pagination tokens produced by `/messages`, `/relations`, `/context`, the `context`
response field of `/search`, and the `prev_batch` response field of `/sync` represent

> a posiiton in the event stream and MUST be indistinguishable. These tokens are referred

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
a position in the event stream and MUST be indistinguishable. These tokens are referred
```
